# Chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 contributes significantly to cellular ABA pools and impacts drought tolerance and photosynthesis in rice

Chengliang Wang1, Shuai Chen1, Yanping Dong1, Ruijuan Ren1, Defu Chen2 ⊚ and Xiwen Chen1

1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China; 2Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China

Authors for correspondence: Defu Chen Tel: +86 22 27902572 Email: chendefu@nankai.edu.cn

# Summary

Xiwen Chen Tel: +86 22 27902572 Email: xiwenchen@nankai.edu.cn Received: 11 October 2019 Accepted: 25 December 2019

New Phytologist (2020) 226: 1042–1054
doi: 10.1111/nph.16416

Key words: abscisic acid (ABA), drought tolerance, phytosynthesis, rice, stomatal density, transcriptomics,  -glucosidase.

 Cellular abscisic acid (ABA) concentration is determined by both de novo biosynthesis and recycling via  -glucosidase(s). However, which rice  -glucosidase(s) are involved in this pro

cess remains unknown. Here, we report on a chloroplastic -glucosidase isoenzyme, Os3BGlu6, that functions in ABA recycling in rice.
 Disruption of Os3BGlu6 in rice resulted in dwarfism, lower ABA content in leaves, droughtsensitivity, lower photosynthesis rate and higher intercellular C O_2 concentration. Os3BGlu6 could hydrolyze ABA-GE to ABA in vitro. The reversion and overexpression rice lines restored or increased the drought tolerance as shown by the higher  -glucosidase activity, ABA concentrations and expressions of ABA- and drought-responsive genes. Drought induced Os3BGlu6 to form dimers, and the degree of polymerization correlated well with the increase in cellular ABA concentrations and drought tolerance in rice.
 Os3BGlu6 was responsive to drought and ABA treatments, and the protein was localized to the chloroplast. Disruption of Os3BGlu6 resulted in the increased stomatal density and impaired stomatal movement. Transcriptomics revealed that disruption of Os3BGlu6 resulted in chloroplastic oxidative stress and lowered Rubisco activity even under normal conditions.  Taken together, these results suggest that chloroplastically localized Os3BGlu6 significantly affects cellular ABA pools, thereby affecting drought tolerance and photosynthesis in rice.

# Introduction

Abscisic acid (ABA) is an ubiquitous hormone involved in plant growth and development. ABA stimulates vegetative growth at low concentrations but inhibits growth at higher concentrations (Barrero et al., 2005). ABA also plays a crucial role in plant responses to several abiotic stresses such as drought, salt and cold (North et al., 2007). In seeds, ABA is involved in embryo development, desiccation tolerance, dormancy and germination (Wang et al., 2019). Additionally, ABA is involved in regulating the stomatal opening, a process crucial for controlling CO_2 concentrations for photosynthesis and water release for transpiration (Kim et al., 2010; He et al., 2018). ABA also limits the initiation of stomatal development and induces enlargement of pavement cells in Arabidopsis cotyledons (Tanaka et al., 2013a). ABA biosynthesis mutants also have been shown to undergo a large increase in stomatal density as the concentration of ABA was reduced (Xie et al., 2006; Lake     Woodward, 2008; Tanaka et al., 2013a).

Because multiple ABA receptors, such as ABA receptor/ pyrabactin tolerance (RCAR/PYR), localize to different cellular regions, the function of ABA previously was thought to be determined by the local concentration, rather than the overall ABA concentration. Cellular ABA concentration is determined by a balance between biosynthesis and catabolism (North et al.,

2007). Two strategies are involved in ABA biosynthesis: complex de novo ABA synthesis, and one-step recycling of Glucose-conjugated ABA (ABA-GE). For de novo ABA synthesis, most of the reactions occur in plastids, except the last two steps, which occur in the cytoplasm. This process is known to regulate ABA concentrations, due to several biosynthetic mutants displaying morphological and physiological defects, including plant height reduction, early germination and sensitivity to environmental stressors (Hey et al., 2010). ABA-GE is a physiologically inactive form of ABA that accumulated in the vacuole or apoplastic space (Dietz et al., 2000). This conjugated product is formed when ABA and hydroxy ABA react with oxidative catabolites and glucose. ABA-GE can be recycled in one step, and  -glucosidases are the enzymes responsible for this recycling process.

. -glucosidases (E.C. 3.2.1.21) are a large family of enzymes that are found universally in all living organisms. These enzymes hydrolyze the  -O-glycosidic bond at the nonreducing terminal glucosyl of glycosides or oligosaccharides, causing the release of Dglucose and an aglycone (Opassiri et al., 2006). Plant  -glucosidases have the broadest substrate specificity and have been implicated in various processes such as cell wall remodeling, defense against herbivory (Ahn et al., 2010) and lignification (Warzecha et al., 2000). A multigene family of 48 members, including eight pseudogenes, is detected in the Arabidopsis genome (Xu et al.,

2004). A constitutively expressed SENSITIVE TO FREEZING2 (SFR2) encoding a protein homologous to  -glycosidases is known to cause a freezing sensitivity phenotype (Thorlby et al., 2004). BGLU45, BGLU46 and B G L U47 in Arabidopsis may encode for coniferin . -glucosidases, which hydrolyze monolignolglucosides in the lignification process (Escamilla-Trevino et al., 2006).

The ABA-GE form was first found to be transported from roots to leaves (Munns     King, 1988), and high ABA-GE concentrations were detected in xylem sap and cell vacuoles under drought stress (Sauter et al., 2002). Exogenous ABA-GE can be hydrolyzed to release ABA by barley  -glucosidase, which is expressed under salt stress (Dietz et al., 2000). Exogenous ABAGE also can inhibit the hypocotyl elongation of Arabidopsis (Kato-Noguchi     Tanaka, 2008). Because ABA-GE cannot pass through the cell membrane, exogenous ABA-GE must first be hydrolyzed by extracellular  -glucosidases to release free ABA (Kato-Noguchi     Tanaka, 2008). Recently, characterizing Arabidopsis BG1 (BGLU18), located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), provided direct evidence for the role of  -glucosidase in ABA recycling (Lee et al., 2006). Arabidopsis atbg1 had a lower endogenous ABA concentration, and showed premature germination and dwarfism (Lee et al., 2006). Dehydration resulted in a high degree of polymerization of AtBG1, which greatly increased the hydrolysis activity of ABA-GE; this increase in activity is an important mechanism of regulating ABA concentrations during drought stress and diurnal cycle changes (Lee et al., 2006). AtBG2 (Arabidopsis BGLU 33), located in vacuoles, also possesses an ABA-GE degrading ability similar to that of AtBG1, and can function in the drought response (Xu et al., 2012). Proteomic analyses suggested that increase in ABA concentration caused by significantly enhanced  -glucosidase expression may be an important mechanism by which tomato roots combat stress under salt and alkaline conditions (Gong et al., 2014).

Forty genes in the  -glucosidase family were discovered in the rice genome, including 36 genes encoding functional proteins, two pseudogenes and two endophytic bacterial genes (Opassiri et al., 2006). Several of these genes encoding . -glucosidase isozymes have been cloned and sequenced. Their kinetic properties, including substrate specificity, were characterized using a recombinant protein expression system (Seshadri et al., 2009). Among these proteins, Os3BGlu6 efficiently hydrolyzed Ṗ -nitrophenyl (pNP)-  -D-fucoside, pNP-  -D-glucoside and pNP- 𝔣 -D-galactoside, but had little activity toward other pNP glycosides, suggesting a preference for short oligosaccharides and hydrophobic glycosides (Hua et al., 2013). Os3BGlu6 also had the highest hydrolysis activity toward gibberellin A_4  -D-glucosyl ester ( GA_4 -GE), among five recombinantly expressed proteins in the rice glycoside hydrolase family (Hua et al., 2013). The mutations E178Q, E178A, E394D, E394Q and M251N in this enzyme confirmed its role as an acid/base catalyst as well as a catalytic nucleophile in the hydrolysis of both substrates (Hua et al., 2013). However, little is known about the specific physiological function and the mode of action of Os3BGlu6 in vivo. Moreover, little is known about the role of this protein in ABA recycling and its contribution to drought stress and photosynthesis.

In the present study, we report that Os3BGlu6, a chloroplastlocalized  -glucosidase, significantly affected cellular ABA pools, thereby playing an important role in drought stress and photosynthesis under normal growth and drought conditions. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to report a rice  -glucosidase that functions in ABA recycling, as well as in the control of photosynthesis and stomatal characteristics in vivo.

# Materials and Methods

# Plant material and growth conditions

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) variety Zhonghua 11 (ZH11) and the chloroplastic . -glucosidase isoenzyme Os3BGlu6 (Os03g0212800) T-DNA insertion mutant 04Z11IG62 were obtained from the rice mutant library of the National Center of Plant Gene Research (Wuhan), Huazhong Agricultural University, China. The overexpression (OE) transgenic lines of Os4BGlu14 (Os04g0513100) (OE-BGLU14) were kept in our laboratory.

Seeds were germinated in a growth chamber with a 12 h:12 h ,light : dark photoperiod at 28^∘C. . After 7 d , seedlings were transplanted into an ⊗15×17 cm cylindrical barrel containing Yoshida’s solution, and cultured in a glasshouse with natural sunlight. Fourteen days later, seedlings were subjected to 21% polyethylene glycol (PEG)6000, 50 M abscisic acid (ABA) or 125 mM NaCl treatment. Root and leaf samples were collected at different time intervals and stored at -80^∘C until use. The roots, leaves, stems and mature embryos also were harvested for tissue-specific expression analysis. For hormone treatment, 3-wkold seedlings grown in the cylindrical barrel were treated by spraying 5, 10 or 20 M ABA; equal amounts of solution containing 0.1% ethanol and 0.02% Tween-20 were used as control.

# Mutant isolation

Genomic DNA was isolated from young leaves using a modified cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) method. Specific primers 04Z11IG62-FS/04Z11IG62-R-AS for targeting genomic fragment and ATosR-04Z11IG62/TosRS-04Z11IG62- R-AS (Supporting Information Table S1) for targeting T-DNA inserted fragment were utilized for amplification. Total RNA was isolated from leaves of the homozyous plants using Trizol (RNAiso Plus, Takara, Dalian, China). cDNAs were synthesized using Reverse Transcriptase M-MLV (RNase H; Takara) and SMART 3^' -end primers. The BGLU6 transcript was analyzed by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR using BGLU6-RT (Table S1) as primers. A 250-bp fragment of rice actin (AB047313) also was amplified as the quantitative control using primer pairs Actin1-F/ Actin1-R (Table S1).

# Quantification of endogenous ABA and giberellic acid (𝖦 𝖠_3) concentrations

Leaf sample (c. 1 g) from 21-d-old seedlings was ground in liquid N_2 , and extracted with 10 ml isopropanol/HCl buffer at 4^∘C for 30 min . After addition of 20 ml of dichloromethane, the mixture was shaken rigorously and kept at 4^∘C for 30 min , followed by centrifugation at 4^∘C for 10 min at 12 000 g. The lower organic phase was collected, dried with N_2 gas, and dissolved in 400 l methanol ( 0.1% formic acid), and subjected to ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) detection using an Acquity UPLC Xevo TQ system (Waters) with an Acquity UPLC R BEH C18 column. The column temperature was set at 40^∘C and the eluent flow was set at 0.3 ml min^-1 . Mobile phase A (water : methanol (98:2, v/v) with 0.05% formic acid and 5 mM ammonium acetate) and mobile phase B (acetonitrile) was set in a gradient mode (time (min) of solvent A (%) : solvent B (%) ,0:90:10 ,4:100:0, 5:90:10, 6:90:10) . Multiple reactions monitoring (MRM) mode under positive and negative ion switching scanning was used for mass spectrometry analysis.

# Development of functional reversion (RE) and OE transgenic lines

BGLU6 cDNA was amplified from leaf cDNAs using primers BGLU6-FLAG-F/BGLU6-FLAG-R (Table S1) with a FLAG epitope added to the N-terminus. Then BGLU6-FLAG was inserted into ps4 (containing the Ubi promoter) using an EcoRV restriction site. The recombinant vector was restricted using the SacI/SpeI restriction site, resulting in a 3.6 kb SacI-Ubi-EcoRVFLAG-BGLU6-SpeI-EcoRV fragment, and ligation was then performed with pCAMBIA1301 using the SacI/XbaI site, yielding the plasmid p1301-Ubi::BGLU6. The RE and OE lines were generated by Agrobacterium (EHA 105 strain)-mediated transformation of mature seed-derived calli from the bglu6 mutant and Zhonghua 11, respectively, as described previously (Chen et al., 2014).

# In vitro ABA-GE hydrolysis of leaf extract

Fresh leaves (c. 1 g) were collected from 21-d-old seedlings and ground with liquid N_2 . After extraction with 1 ml  0.1 M (pH 6.6) phosphate buffer, the homogenate was centrifuged at 6000 g for 15 min . The supernatant was then adjusted to pH 5.0 and incubated at 4^∘C for 24 h . After centrifuging again at 6000 g for 15 min , a crude enzyme solution was obtained. The enzyme reaction contained 1.2 ml  0.1 M citrate buffer, 0.4 ml enzyme solution and 8 l 2 nM ABA-GE (OlChemIm, Olomouc, Czech Republic). After incubation at 30^∘C for 0.5 h ,the solution was adjusted to pH 3 , and extracted with ethyl acetate. The organic phases were evaporated, and the residues were dissolved in 50% methanol, and subjected to HPLC 1200 series (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) analysis using a 4.6×250 mm Comatex C18 column. Elution was performed using both solvent A ( 0.8% glacial acetic acid) and solvent B 100% methanol, 0-4 min 45% , 4–5 min 45–50% ,5-17 min 50–60% ,17-18 min 60% ,18–19 min  60–45%) , at a flow rate of 0.8 ml min^-1 . ABA-GE and ABA were monitored at a wavelength of 260 nm . The activity unit (U) was defined as the amount of enzyme that converts 0.01 mol of ABA-GE into ABA per hour at 30^∘C .

# Drought treatment and physiological parameter determination

Rice seedlings that germinated for 7 d were transplanted into the same rectangular plastic pots containing equal amounts of soil. After 14 d grown in the glasshouse, the seedlings were droughttreated by not watering for 7 d , and then watered for 7 d (rehydration). The survival rates, chlorophyll fluorescence variable fluorescence/maximal fluorescence (F_ν/F_m) parameters and relative water content (RWC) were determined according to the methods described in our previous research (Ren et al., 2019) using an ultra-portable chlorophyll fluorimeter Mini-PAM-II (Walz, Nuremberg, Germany).

Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) and diaminobenzidine (DAB) were used to observe the accumulation of O_2^ - and H_2O_2 in leaves according to the methods described in Dou et al., 2014. Photosynthetic rate and intercellular CO_2 concentration were determined using a LI-6400 Portable Photosynthesis System (LiCor, Lincoln, NE, USA) in the morning 9·00 h to 12:00 h with a PPFD of 1200 mol m^-2 s^-1 , cuvette temperature of 25^∘C, reference CO_2 concentration of 400 mol mol^-1 , and relative humility of 70–80% . Once readings were stable, measurements were taken every 20 s for 5 min .

# Determination of  -glucosidase activity

Enzyme solutions were extracted from leaves according to method described in Wang et al., 2011. The reaction solution contained 0.4 ml of enzyme solution and 1.6 ml  0.1 M phosphate-citrate buffer containing 2.5 mM Ṗ -nitrophenyl-  -D-glucopyranoside (pNPG) (pH 5.0) . After 30 min of incubation at 30^∘C , the reaction was terminated by addition of 2 ml  0.5 mM Na_2CO_3 solution. The Ṗ -nitrophenol released in the reaction was determined by the yellow color in spectrophotometer at 400 nm .A unit of enzyme activity (U) was defined as the amount of . -glucosidases that liberated 1 M Ṗ -nitrophenol/min under the experimental conditions.

# Quantitative Real-Time PCR analysis

qRT-PCR was performed on a CFX Connect TM Real-time PCR System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using SYBR Premix Ex Taq II kit (Takara). Each reaction contained 10 l 2×SYBR Premix Ex Taq II buffer, 1 g cDNA and 10 mol of each pair of primers (listed in Table S1) in a final volume of 20 l . A rice actin gene (AB047317) was used as an internal control to normalize the data.

# Subcellular location

The green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene was amplified using primer pairs of AcGFP-BamHI-F/AcGFP-BglII-R (Table S1) from pAcGFP (gift from Jiafu Long, Nankai University) and then introduced into a plant binary expression vector to generate p35S::GFP. Subsequently, the cDNA sequence of BGLU6 was introduced into the C-terminal and N-terminal region of GFP to generate p438 -BGLU6-GFP and p438 -GFP-BGLU6, respectively. Protoplasts were isolated from 2-wk-old Arabidopsis seedlings, and transformation was performed under 40% PEG conditions as described previously (Yoo et al., 2007). Protoplasts were excited at 488 nm and fluorescence was detected at 516 nm for GFP and 620 nm for autofluorescence using a laser scanning confocal microscope (TCS SP5; Leica) (Zeng et al., 2017).

# Stomatal observation

The middle region of the adaxial side from each second to last leaf was fixed using white nail polish (Hughes et al., 2017). Stomatal pictures were captured using an advanced optical microscope. The stomatal density, size, length and width were calculated using IMAGEJ v.1.8.0 software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Twenty samples for each genotype were collected, and three biological replicates were performed for each experiment.

# Protein extraction and western blotting

Protein solutions used for SDS-PAGE and native PAGE analysis were extracted using the MinuteTMTotal Protein Extraction Kit SN-008 or SN-009 (Invent Biotechnologies, Inc., Plymouth, MN, USA), respectively, and the chloroplastic proteins were extracted using a MinuteTMChloroplast Isolation Kit CP-011, according to the methods provided by the manufacturer. Western blots were performed using Flag-Tag antibody and anti-mouse antibody. The protein blots were developed with an ECL Detection Kit (Invent Biotechnologies), and images were obtained using a Tanon 5200 Chemiluminescence Imaging System (Millipore).

# Transcriptome analysis

Leaves from 21-d-old wild-type (WT) and bglu6 mutant seedlings were used for transcriptome analysis. Total RNA was isolated using the Kang Wei Century Column Extraction system. The mRNA was purified using oligo (dT) magnetic beads (Yrdimes, Taipei, China), and fragmented using fragmentation buffer. Fragmented mRNA was reverse-transcribed from the first strand of cDNAs using six-base random primers. The second strand of cDNAs was synthesized through the addition of dNTPs, RNase H-free and DNA polymerase I. After purification using the QIAQuick PCR kit, end-repair with base A was performed, and a sequencing linker was added. The library fragments were enriched using PCR amplification and sequenced using Illumina Hiseq X Ten. The RNA-seq data are available in the NCBI Read Archive under accession no. SRP201701.

# Results

Disruption of BGLU6 results in dwarfism and decreased ABA concentrations

We isolated a rice bglu6 mutant (04Z11IG62) with a T-DNA insertion in the sixth intron of the gene (Fig. 1a). Molecular analysis revealed that this T-DNA insertion resulted in no detectable expression of BGLU6 in leaves and roots (Fig. S1a,b). Phenotypic analysis showed that disruption of BGLU6 led to a 46.2% and 66.9% decrease in seedling plant height compared to the WT, at 7 and 14 d post-transplantation, respectively (Figs 1b, S1c,d). The dwarf phenotype was present throughout the entire growth and development stages (Figs 1b, S1c,d). By contrast, no difference was seen in root length of bglu6 compared to the WT root length (data not shown). To confirm the role of BGLU6 on plant height, we generated bglu6 RE and OE transgenic rice lines by introducing an Ubiquitin-driven construct harboring BGLU6 (Fig. S2a). The plant height of BGLU6 RE lines were 93.2% that of the WT, indicating a nearly complete restoration of height through expression of B G L U6 in the mutant. BGLU6 OE lines had a plant height of 120.5% of the WT (Fig. S2b,c, . Likewise, no obvious difference was seen in root length and weight between these genotypes (data not shown).

-glucosidases have been reported to hydrolyze inactive ABAGE, and result in an increase in the endogenous ABA concentration. To investigate if the dwarfism is related to cellular ABA concentration, we examined the endogenous ABA content in leaves of the WT and the bglu6 mutant at the seedling stage. ABA content in bglu6 was 68.2% that of the WT (Fig. 1c). We also examined leaf GA_3 content and no difference was seen between the WT and the bglu6 mutant (Fig. 1c), suggesting the enzyme is specific for hydrolysis of ABA-GE. Furthermore, spraying 10 M ABA onto bglu6 leaves partly restored the plant height of bglu6 (Fig. 1d).

Taken together, these results indicate that disruption of BGLU6 affects ABA concentration in leaves, resulting in a dwarfism in the mutant.

# BGLU6 hydrolyzes ABA-GE in vitro

In order to further confirm the role of BGLU6 in hydrolyzing ABA-GE, we selected the OE-5 line for the hydrolysis analysis as it exhibited the highest BGLU6 protein expression level (Fig. 2a). We extracted crude proteins from leaves and incubated them with ABA-GE in vitro; the reaction products were separated by HPLC. Both the WT and OE-5 plants displayed a novel peak at the position for ABA, which was larger in the OE-5 plant (Fig. 2b), indicating that OE-BGLU6 gained extra ABA-GE hydrolyzing ability. However, the OE-BGLU14 plant displayed a peak equivalent to that of the WT (Fig. 2b), which further confirmed the specific ABA-GE hydrolyzing ability of BGLU6 in vitro.

Under normal conditions, the hydrolysis activity of ABA-GE in the OE-5 line was 22.6% higher than that of the WT (Fig. 2c). After 2 d of drought stress, the hydrolysis activity in the WT and the OE-5 line was increased to 121% and 105% of activity before the treatment (Fig. 2c). Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate that BGLU6 hydrolyzes ABA-GE to ABA in vitro, and that this activity can be enhanced by drought stress.

Disruption of BGLU6 results in a drought-sensitive phenotype accompanied by a decrease in photosynthesis

Because disruption of BGLU6 affected the ABA concentration in leaves, and ABA is a stress-related hormone, we therefore applied staining corresponded well with the respective drought-tolerance phenotype in these genotypes (Fig. 3c,d,e).


Fig. 1 Rice bglu6 mutant showed a dwarf phenotype that could be partially recovered by the application of ABA (BGLU,  -glucosidase). (a) Schematic representation of the T-DNA insertion in the bglu6 mutant. (b) Representative pictures of the wild-type (WT) and bglu6 rice plants at seedling stage for 7 and 14 d post-transplantation, and at maturity. (c) The endogenous abscisic acid (ABA) and gibberellic acid (𝖦 𝖠_3) concentrations in the leaves of WT and bglu6 rice seedlings. Values are shown as mean ±  S D (n=3) . Significant difference: , P<0.01 (Student–Newman–Keuls test). (d) Rice bglu6 plants were partially recovered after application of 0, 5, 10 and 20  M ABA.
Fig. 2 Rice  -glucosidase (BGLU)6 can hydrolyze exogenous glucose-conjugated abscisic acid (ABA-GE) to ABA in vitro. (a) BGLU6 protein abundances revealed by Western blotting assay using anti-FLAG antibody in rescued BGLU6 (RE), and overexpressing BGLU6 (OE) transgenic rice lines. (b) HPLC pattern of leaf protein extract of wild-type (WT), OE-5 and OE-BGLU14 rice plants (under normal condition) in hydrolysis exogenous ABA-GE. (c) The ABAGE hydrolyzing activity of the WT and OE-5 rice leaf protein extract before and after drought treatment. Values are shown as mean ±  S D (n=3) . Significant differences: , P<0.05 ;∗∗ ,P<0.01 (Student–Newman– Keuls test).
drought treatment to 21-d-old seedlings of bglu6, RE and OE lines. After 7 d of treatments, bglu6 plants showed the severest visual symptoms such as rolling and wilting, whereas RE and OE plants showed similar or milder symptoms compared to the WT (Fig. 3a). After rewatering, the survival rate of bglu6 was only 25.3% , whereas those of the WT, RE and OE lines were 78.7% ,88% and 90.7% , respectively (Fig. 3b). To further confirm the role of B G L U6 in drought tolerance, we determined chlorophyll fluorescence parameters F_ν/F_m (the maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II), RWC, and carried out DAB and NBT staining. The decrease in F_ν/F_m, RWC and the color of H_2O_2 and O_2^  -

Meanwhile, we determined the photosynthesis rate and intercellular CO_2 concentration before and after drought treatment. Under normal conditions, the photosynthetic rate of bglu6 was significantly decreased, which was 77.7% of that of the WT, whereas the photosynthetic rates of the RE and OE lines were 100.5% and 122.5% that of the WT, respectively (Fig. 3f). After 2 d of drought stress, the photosynthetic rate of bglu6 was decreased to 55.2% of the rate before treatment, whereas photosynthetic rate of the WT, RE and OE lines was decreased to


Fig. 3 Rice bglu6 mutant plants are less resistant to drought stress (BGLU,  -glucosidase). (a) The growth status and (b) survival rates of wild-type (WT), bglu6, rescued BGLU6 (RE) and overexpressing BGLU6 (OE) transgenic rice lines before and after drought treatment for 7 d and recovered for 7 d . (c) F_v/F_m was measured before and after drought for 1 and 4 d. (d) relative water content, (e) Diaminobenzidine (DAB) (displaying 𝖧_2𝖮_2) and Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) (displaying O_2^ ) staining, (f) photosynthetic rate, and (g) intercellular C O_2 concentration of the WT, bglu6, RE and OE rice plants before and after drought for 2 d. Values are shown as mean ±  S D (n=3) .Different uppercase letters indicate significant differences between genotypes at P<0.01 .

64.8% ,60.6% and 82.2% of the rate before treatment (Fig. 3f), which further indicated that bglu6 plant was sensitive to drought. Furthermore, the decreased photosynthesis rate was always accompanied by an increased intercellular CO_2 concentration (Fig. 3g).

Taken together, these results show that disruption of BGLU6 results in a drought-sensitive phenotype accompanied by a decrease in photosynthesis capability.

# BGLU6 contributes to the increased cellular ABA concentration under drought conditions

In order to further determine the contribution of BGLU6 to cellular ABA concentrations in response to drought, we examined the total  -glucosidase activity and cellular ABA content in bglu6, RE and OE lines, and WT plants before and after drought treatment. The . -glucosidase activities in all genotypes were higher under drought condition than under normal growth condition. The OE and bglu6 plants showed the highest and lowest activity under both conditions, which were 139.3–146.1% and

66.9–76.8% of the WT, respectively (Fig. 4a). A similar trend was observed for the cellular ABA concentration in these genotypes (Fig. 4b).

In order to further examine the role of BGLU6 in cellular ABA concentrations under drought conditions, we compared the expressions of key genes involved in the drought and ABA signaling pathway among the bglu6, RE and OE lines, and WT plants (Fig. 4c). The OsNCED4 as well as OsNCED5 (involved in ABA synthesis) transcripts in bglu6 were significantly higher (2.73– 4.53-fold) than that in the WT before drought, suggesting that disruption of BGLU6 stimulated ABA synthesis in the mutant (Figs 4c, S3). However, OsNCED4 and OsNCED5 transcripts showed no significant difference in all genotypes after drought stress (Figs 4c, S3). The OsABA8ox2 and OsABA8ox3 (involved in ABA catabolism) transcripts showed a similar pattern to those of ABA synthesis genes (Figs 4c, S3). These results indicate that ABA de novo synthesis is not significantly involved in the contribution of cellular ABA concentrations in these genotypes under drought conditions. Furthermore, AP59 (drought marker gene), and RAB16A and RABl6D (ABA responsive genes) transcripts showed similar patterns to those of ABA concentrations under normal and drought conditions, with bglu6 and OE showing the lowest and highest expression levels, respectively (Figs 4c, S3), lending further support to the notion that ABA concentrations and drought tolerance are closely correlated in these genotypes.


Fig. 4  -glucosidase (BGLU6) contributes to increased cellular abscisic acid (ABA) concentration in rice under drought conditions: (a)  -Glucosidase activity; (b) ABA concentrations. (c) The expression levels of drought-responsive gene and ABA biosynthetic, catabolic and responsive genes in the leaves of wild-type (WT), bglu6, rescued BGLU6 (RE), and overexpressing BGLU6 (OE) rice plants before and after drought for 2 d. (d) Polymerization of BGLU6. Protein extracts were prepared from OE-5 rice plants at various time points after drought treatment and then subjected to a native PAGE analysis. The molecular weight positions were determined by Western blotting assay using the indicated antibodies. (e) Percentage of the high molecular weight forms were presented as the intensity of the indicated band to the total amount of BGLU6. Values are shown as mean ± SD (n=3) . Different uppercase letters indicate significant differences between genotypes at P<0.01 based on ANOVA-Student– Newman–Keuls test by SPSS 22.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).

It was reported that AtBG1 became polymerization and thereby increased the ABA-GE degrading activity and ABA concentrations under dehydration condition (Lee et al, 2006). To determine whether a similar mechanism also exists in BGLU6, we performed native-PAGE analysis and Western blotting using protein extracts of the OE-5. BGLU6-FLAG existed primarily as monomers and no obvious polymerization occurred in the unstressed or 12–24-h-stressed plants (Fig. 4d,e). BGLU6-FLAG began to form dimers in plants following stress treatment from 48 to % h , with the percentage of dimers increasing to the highest (60%) at 48 h (Fig. 4d,e), indicating that dehydration induces polymerization of BGLU6. Furthermore, the percentage of high molecular weight BGLU6 correlated well with the cellular ABA concentrations under drought condition.

Taken together, our data strongly demonstrated that BGLU6 contributes significantly to the increased ABA concentration in vivo under drought condition.

# BGLU6 is responsive to drought and ABA, and the protein localizes to the chloroplast

In order to further investigate the function of BGLU6, the expression pattern of BGLU6 in various tissues was analyzed by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. As shown in Fig. 5(a), BGLU6 expression was highest in leaves, at a 5.5-fold greater concentration than its expression in roots, followed by stems (0.7-fold that of roots) and embryos (0.2-fold that of roots).

In order to reveal inducible expression patterns of BGLU6, changes in the transcript levels of BGLU6 in roots and leaves of WT in response to PEG, salinity (NaCl) and ABA were analyzed (Fig. 5b). After PEG treatment, the BGLU6 expression was rapidly induced at 1 h , with a 5.0-fold increase when compared to levels before treatment. The transcript level in leaves increased gradually with time, reaching a peak of 24.2-fold greater than the level before treatment at 24 h . After NaCl treatment, the transcript level in roots at 1 h was upregulated to 9.6-fold of that before treatment. However, the highest induction was not present in leaves; on the contrary, the transcript level in leaves exhibited a slight downregulation (Fig. 5b). These results indicated that BGLU6 responded to drought but not to salt stresses.


Fig. 5 Tissue-specific and induction patterns of β -glucosidase (BGLU6) and localization of BGLU6 protein. (a) Tissue-specific expression of BGLU6 in rice. (b) Inducible expression patterns of BGLU6 under polyethylene glycol (PEG), NaCl and abscisic acid (ABA) treatment conditions. Values are shown as mean ±  S D [n=3) . (c) BGLU6-GFP, BGLU6 and green fluorescence fusion protein (GFP, green fluorescent protein): Chloroplast, chlorophyll auto fluorescence; Bright, brightfield image under transmitted light; Merge, merged image of BGLU6-GFP, Chloroplast and Bright. Excitation/emission wavelengths were 488/516 𝗇 𝗆 for GFP, and 488/620 nm for auto fluorescence. Bars, 15 m .

The transcript pattern induced by ABA was like that induced by PEG. One hour after treatment, the transcript level in roots was highest at 7.2-fold greater that before treatment. Subsequently, the transcript level gradually declined from 3 to 24 h ,but was still higher than that of the control. The transcript level in leaves reached a peak at 24 h , which was 15.6-fold greater than those of the control (Fig. 5b).

The subcellular localization of the BGLU6 protein also was determined. Two expression vectors linking GFP to the C(p438-BGLU6-GFP) and N- p438 -GFP-BGLU6) termini of BGLU6, respectively, were transiently transformed into Arabidopsis leaf protoplasts. Colocalization of BGLU6-GFP and autofluorescence were detected regardless of the GFP orientation (Figs 5c, S4a). To further confirm the location, we isolated the chloroplastic protein from OE-5 leaves and performed Western blot analysis. A specific BGLU6 band was present in the chloroplast protein (Fig. S4b). Taken together, these results indicated that the BGLU6 protein was localized to the chloroplast.

# BGLU6 affects stomatal density and stomatal opening during drought

Because disruption of BGLU6 resulted in a decrease in endogenous ABA concentrations in leaves, and BGLU6 was localized to the chloroplast, we examined the stomatal characteristics of WT, bglu6, RE and OE lines in leaves. Under normal conditions, bglu6 had significantly increased stomatal density, at 157.5% that of the WT. The increased stomatal density could be restored by expressing BGLU6 in the mutant, whereas in the OE line the density was not significantly different from that of the WT (Fig. 6a,c). After drought stress, stomatal density was slightly higher in these genotypes compared to that before treatment, except in the OE line, which had equivalent stomatal densities to those before stress (Fig. 6a,c). Taken together, these results indicate that disruption of BGLU6 affects stomatal density in leaves.

Additionally, we measured stomatal area, length and aperture before and after drought stress. Under normal conditions, bglu6 had slightly decreased stomatal area and length, at 88.2% and 82.5% that of the WT, whereas the RE and OE lines were not significantly different compared to the WT (Fig. ^6b,d,e ). However, bglu6 mutant had significantly larger stomatal apertures, at 189% the size in the WT, whereas the RE and OE lines did not show a difference (Fig. 6b,f). After stress, stomatal area and length had nearly the same amount of change in these genotypes;


Fig. 6 Stomatal characteristics of wild-type (WT), bglu6, revision (RE) and overexpression (OE) transgenic rice lines (BGLU,  -glucosidase). (a) Advanced upright optical microscope images of the middle of the second to last leaves for the WT and bglu6 mutants. Bars, 100 m . (b) Images of WT, bglu6, RE and OE transgenic rice lines under normal and drought stress conditions. Bars, 10 𝗆 . (c) Stomatal density, (d) stomatal area, (e) length and (f) aperture of WT, bglu6, RE and OE transgenic rice lines were determined under normal and drought conditions. Three random scopes were observed in each repeat. Values are shown as mean ±  S D .n=3. . Different uppercase letters indicate significant differences between genotypes at P<0.01 based on ANOVA-Student–Newman–Keuls test by SPSS 22.0.
however, differences in stomatal aperture were observed among genotypes, with the bglu6 mutant exhibiting no closed stomata, and OE plants having mostly closed stomata (Fig. 6b,d,e,f).

In summary, disruption of BGLU6 led to increased stomata density in leaves and abnormal stomatal closure under drought stress.

Disruption of BGLU6 results in chloroplastic oxidative stress and lower photosynthesis efficiency

In order to further understand the function of chloroplastic BGLU6, global transcriptomics were compared using 2-wk-old WT and bglu6 leaves. A total of 319 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between the WT and the bglu6 mutant. Of these, 170 and 149 genes were significantly upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in bglu6 compared to the WT. When comparative gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed on these DEGs, the top five enriched cellular components were: extracellular region, photosystem I reaction center, photosystem I, chloroplast and plastid (Table S2). The top five enriched biological processes were: response to stress, cell wall macromolecule metabolic process, carbohydrate derivative metabolic process, response to stimulus and tricarboxylic acid metabolic process (Table S3). The top five enriched pathways were: amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, toxoplasmosis, carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, and steroid hormone biosynthesis (Table S2).

Of the downregulated DEGs, seven were related to stress. Of these, heat shock protein 81-2 (OS09G0482100), SPX domaincontaining protein (OS02G0202200) and embryonic abundant protein (OS05G0349800) were downregulated the most (Table S4). Four DEGs that participate in photosynthesis were identified, with ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase large chain (OS01G0791033), ATP synthase subunit beta, chloroplastic (OS10G0355800) downregulated the most (Table S3). Besides these, we also found that positive regulation of abscisic acid biosynthesis process (GO0010116) was significantly enriched in the DEGs. The expression patterns of these DEGs were confirmed by q-RT-PCR analysis (Fig. S5). Taken together, the above results suggest that disruption of BGLU6 affects chloroplastic oxidative stress and lowers the photosynthesis efficiency, even under normal condition.

# Discussion

Chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 contributes significantly to cellular ABA pools in rice

Generally, cellular abscisic acid (ABA) concentration in plant tissue is not only regulated by de novo synthesis, but also by recycling from inactive ABA-GE form via  -glucosidases. Until now, only two Arabidopsis . -glucosidase homologs, AtBG1 and AtBG2, have been reported to be involved in the ABA recycling process to increase cellular ABA concentration under dehydration (Lee et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2011). It is not known if any rice (Oryza sativa)  -glucosidase(s) function in recycling of ABA, or if these enzymes contribute to cellular ABA concentrations in vivo. In this study, using the rice bglu6 mutant, we demonstrated that chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 contributes significantly to cellular ABA pools in rice, and functions under both normal and drought conditions.

Despite the presence of the de novo synthesis pathway, rice bglu6 mutant exhibited a variety of ABA-deficient phenotypes, including dwarfism (Figs 1b, S1c, S2b,ς ) and lower drought tolerance (Fig. 3a–e). The dwarfism of bglu6 was restored partially by exogenously supplying ABA (Fig. 1d). ABA-GE hydrolyzing activity also was confirmed by in vitro analysis with leaf protein extract (Fig. 2b,c). The reversion and overexpressing (RE and OE) lines restored or significantly increased plant height and drought tolerance, as shown by the higher  -glucosidase activity, ABA concentrations, and expressions of ABA- and stress-responsive genes under drought stress (Figs S2, 3a-e, 4). These results strongly demonstrated that BGLU6 contributes significantly to the increased ABA concentration under drought condition. Although no ABA-deficient rice mutant has been reported until now, the bglu6 mutant exhibited a similar phenotype to the Arabidopsis Atbg1 mutant described previously (Lee et al., 2006). The Atbg1 mutant is considered the most severe ABA-deficient mutant (Seo     Koshiba, 2002), whereas the Arabidopsis Atbg2 mutant shows a relatively milder phenotype (Xu et al., 2012). Therefore, we propose that chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 contributes significantly to total cellular ABA pools in rice. This also is the first  -glucosidase homolog identified as functioning in the recycling of ABA in monocotyledons.

In plant leaves, ABA-GE is stored in the vacuole and apoplastic space (Dietz et al., 2000). Arabidopsis  -glucosidase homologs AtBG1 and AtBG2 involved in recycling ABA-GE were located to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and vacuole, respectively. Under stress, ABA-GE stored in the vacuole or apoplastic space is transported to the ER and hydrolyzed there by AtBG1, or directly degraded in the vacuole by AtBG2. By contrast to these two  -glucosidase homologs, Os3BGlu6 localizes to the chloroplast. These conclusions are based on Arabidopsis protoplast localization analysis using BGLU-GFP (Figs 5c, S4a), immunoblotting of chloroplast proteins (Fig. S4b), and prediction analysis using WOLF PSORT software (Computational Biology Research Center, AIST, Japan). The identification of a different subcellular location of the Os3BGlu6 homolog suggests that plant cells may contain organelle-specific  -glucosidase isoform(s) that hydrolyze ABA-GE to fine-tune local ABA concentrations.

In this study, we also showed a high expression of Os3BGlu6 in leaves, which could be further upregulated by polyethylene glycol (PEG) and ABA. Therefore, drought-induced increase in protein abundance is one mechanism by which Os3BGlu6 functions to increase ABA concentrations under drought. More importantly, in vitro activity assay showed that the enzymatic activity could be enhanced by drought (Fig. ^2b,c, ). This may be due to the polymerization of BGLU6 under drought treatment (Fig. 4d,e). That ER-localized AtBG1 activity could be rapidly activated through polymerization under dehydration condition also was reported previously (Lee et al., 2006). Further research is needed to test whether BGLU6 polymerization could improve its ABA-degrading activity.

# Chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 affects stomatal density and aperture under normal and drought conditions

Stomata, the pores in the shoot epidermis of land plants, are a primary gate for gas exchange between the plant and atmosphere (Bergmann     Sack, 2007). Generally, plants regulate stomatal density in early development stages and stomatal opening in later stages to maintain a balance between plant photosynthesis and water dispersion loss. ABA plays crucial roles in modulating stomatal density and movement in response to environmental factors (Acharya     Assmann, 2009). However, it is still not clear if disruption of ABA recycling enzymes affects stomatal density and aperture in rice plants.

In this study, bglu6 had significantly higher stomatal density compared to the wild-type (WT) (Fig. 6a,c). The RE line restored the stomatal density to the WT under both normal and drought conditions. The OE line had significantly decreased stomatal density after drought stress (Fig. 6a). These data suggest that disruption of ABA recycling by Os3BGlu6 affects stomatal density in rice. This observation is in agreement with a study which found that ABA de novo synthesis mutants potato Droopy and Arabidopsis aba2-2 had more stomata under normal and drought conditions (Quarrie, 1982; Lake     Woodward, 2008; Tanaka et al., 2013a), due to the negative regulation of ABA on SPCH (SPEECHLESS) and MUTE, two transcription factors that boost stomatal differentiation (Tanaka et al., 2013a). However, our observation contrasts with reports of a carotenoid-defi- cient mutant (p b s) and  -carotene hydroxylase deficient mutant (dsm2) in which endogenous ABA concentrations were decreased prominently whereas stomatal densities were not changed (Du et al., 2010, 2013). Therefore, we propose that only those pathways that significantly affect ABA pools in leaves affect stomatal density in rice, highlighting the importance of Os3BGlu6 in regulating ABA pools of leaves. In addition, it was reported that stomatal density is negatively correlated with stomatal size (Yu et al., 2013). This correlation also was found in our study, as the stomatal length and area of bglu6 mutant were significantly lower than those of the WT, whereas the RE and OE lines restored these parameters (Fig. 6d,e).

The effect of ABA on stomatal aperture also has been widely recognized. ABA-deficient potato and Arabidopsis mutants showed abnormally increased stomatal apertures under water-sufficient conditions, and the phenomenon was more pronounced after drought stress (Dodd et al., 2009; Okamoto et al., 2009). A GIBBERELLIN-INSENSITIVE DWARF 1 (gld1) mutant suppressed the expression of NCED3, NCED4 and NCED5, decreased endogenous ABA concentrations, and eventually inhibited stomatal closure (Du et al., 2015). An ABA recycling mutant, atbg1, showed defective stomatal closure at night in addition to high drought sensitivity (Lee et al., 2006). However, the ABA recycling mutant atbg1, atbg2 and atbg1bg2 showed intact stomatal response under elevated CO_2 concentrations, reduced air humidity and exogenous ABA treatment (Merilo et al., 2015). Our research showed that bglu6 had increased stomatal apertures under normal conditions, and an increased number of stomatal pores remained open under drought stress (Fig. ^6b,f) .The stomatal aperture of the OE line was significantly lower than that of the WT under both normal and drought conditions (Fig. 6f). These results again confirm the significant role of Os3BGlu6 in maintaining ABA pools. As de novo ABA synthesis originates in the chloroplast, it is perhaps not surprising that chloroplast-localized Os3BGlu6 plays a vital function in guard cell ABA signaling.

# Disruption of chloroplastic Os3BGlu6 may result in chloroplast oxidation, leading to a decrease in photosynthesis

Photosynthesis in leaves is fundamental to biomass production and the global carbon cycle. As mentioned above, two Arabidopsis ABA recycling genes have been reported previously. However, their function and mechanism related to photosynthesis remains unclear. In this study, bglu6 had lower photosynthesis rate under normal conditions (Fig. 3f), which was supported by a higher intercellular carbon dioxide concentration (Ci) (Fig. 3g), indicating that disruption of BGLU6 decreased photosynthesis activity, thus contributing to the dwarfism of the mutant.

Generally, photosynthetic rate is determined by a carboxylation reaction represented by RuBPCase (demand function) and C O_2 gas diffusion (supply function). As discussed above, bglu6 had increased stomatal density and wider aperture under normal condition, which would facilitate the CO_2 gas diffusion process. Increased stomatal density also was reported to have increased photosynthetic capacity owing to facilitation of the CO_2 gas diffusion process (Tanaka et al., 2013b). However, increased stomatal density and wider apertures in bglu6 did not result in higher photosynthesis rates in our study. A reason for this could be that the simultaneous modification of stomatal density and aperture may result in imbalance between water status and energy metabolism. This also is the situation in overexpressing STOMAGEN lines, as a significant upregulation of transpiration rate also was observed, thus suggesting that water stress would occur even under normal condition (Tanaka et al., 2013b). This also was confirmed by our transcriptome analysis, which found that seven differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to stress response were downregulated in bglu6. At the same time, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase large chain (OS01G0791033) and chloroplastic ATP synthase subunit beta (OS10G0355800) were the most downregulated DEGs in bglu6 (Table S4). Moreover, H_2O_2 and O_2^  - staining revealed that bglu6 exhibited chloroplastic oxidative stress even under normal conditions (Fig. 3e). Decreased photosynthesis capability and inactivation of enzymes for CO_2 assimilation also were reported in thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase (tAPX) mutant (Danna, 2003) and chloroplastic CuZn-SOD knockdown plants (Rizhsky et al., 2003) with reduced ability to cope with reactive oxygen species even under mild conditions. Taken together, our data suggest that in the absence of ABA, bglu6 has abnormal stomatal density and movement, resulting in chloroplast oxidation in addition to significant downregulation of major genes involved in photosynthesis, which ultimately leads to a decline in photosynthesis.

In conclusion, in this study we report on a chloroplastic  -glucosidase isoenzyme, Os3BGlu6, which contributes significantly to cellular ABA pools, and plays important roles in controlling drought tolerance, stomatal density, aperture size and photosynthesis. As the plastid or chloroplast is an important organelle for perceiving the environment, and for the synthesis and storage of ABA, the discovery of an ABA-recycling isoenzyme in plastids/ chloroplasts highlights the importance of the chloroplastic ABA signal.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos. 31571760 and 31570769), the key program of the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (no. 17JCZDJC34000), and the creative group project of the Rice Industry Technological System of Tianjin (no. ITTRRS2018005).

# Author contribution

DC and XC devised and supervised the project; CW, SC and YD performed the experiments; CW, SC, RR, DC and XC analyzed the data; and CW, SC, DC and XC wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed, revised and approved the manuscript.

# ORCID

Defu Chen ⊚ https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1742-6011
Xiwen Chen ⊚ https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6511-4709
